EXPERIMENT-3:


1. SECTION: Top Bar (<header>)
Goal:
The goal here was to design a top navigation bar that contains the title "Admin Dashboard" aligned to the left, and a clickable dark mode toggle (styled text) on the right.

VALIDATION STEPS:

Verified that the heading is visible, properly aligned, and readable.

Ensured that the dark mode label acts as a toggle (via a hidden checkbox).

Checked alignment of all header elements for consistent spacing.

POTENTIAL ISSUES ENCOUNTERED:

Occasionally, the toggle text wasn’t aligning properly or overlapping with the title on smaller screens.

2. SECTION: Sidebar (<nav> inside a vertical section)
Goal:
I created a sidebar that contains navigation links such as Home, Users, and Settings. This section resides on the left side of the layout and uses semantic HTML for clarity.

VALIDATION STEPS:

Confirmed all links display with default or themed styling (dark/light mode-aware).

Verified that the navigation block used appropriate HTML tags (<nav> with unordered list).

Ensured good visibility and spacing for clickable links.

--POTENTIAL ISSUES ENCOUNTERED:

Initial color contrast issues in dark mode, which I later fixed using CSS variables.

3. SECTION: Main Panel (Primary Content Area)
Goal:
The central area of the dashboard serves as a space for dynamic content such as tables, analytics, or reports. For now, it includes a welcome message and a description.

--VALIDATION STEPS:

Verified presence of a proper heading and paragraph in the main panel.

Ensured text color adapts correctly based on the theme mode.

Used consistent padding and spacing for readability.

--POTENTIAL ISSUES ENCOUNTERED:

Text was not readable in dark mode until appropriate theme colors were defined using CSS variables.

4. SECTION: Bottom Bar (<footer>)
Goal:
This is the bottom-most section which provides a simple footer with copyright.

--VALIDATION STEPS:

Checked that the footer remains fixed at the bottom regardless of content size.

Ensured the footer uses the same color theme as the header for consistency.

Confirmed the text “© 2025 Admin Panel” was included and centered.

--POTENTIAL ISSUES ENCOUNTERED:

Needed to fine-tune padding and layout to avoid white space between footer and content in short pages.

5. THEME TOGGLE (Checkbox-Driven, Pure CSS)
Goal:
Implemented a fully CSS-based dark mode toggle using a hidden checkbox and custom CSS variables. When the user clicks the “Dark Mode” label, the theme switches without using any JavaScript.

--VALIDATION STEPS:

Defined all theme-related variables using :root.

Used #theme-toggle:checked ~ .dashboard to override color values.

Ensured every part of the UI updated properly in both light and dark themes.

--LIGHT THEME:

Header/Footer: Greenyellow

Background: White

Text: Black

--DARK THEME:

Header/Footer: Black

Background: Near black

Text: White

Border: Darkened for contrast

--POTENTIAL ISSUES ENCOUNTERED:

Initially had low contrast for links and text in dark mode.

Required adjustments in main content background and sidebar to maintain legibility.


--CSS STYLING STRUCTURE:

1. body (Global Setup)
Purpose:
Sets base background, font, and text color using theme variables. Everything inherits from here.

Properties:

background: var(--bg-color);
color: var(--text-color);
font-family: sans-serif;
2. .dashboard (Grid Layout Container)
Purpose:
Wraps the entire layout using CSS Grid to define structure: Header, Sidebar, Main Content, Footer.

Properties:
display: grid;
grid-template-areas:
  "header header"
  "sidebar main"
  "footer footer";
grid-template-columns: 200px 1fr;
grid-template-rows: 60px 1fr 40px;

3. .header (Top Navigation Bar)
Purpose:
Displays the title and dark mode toggle side by side.

 Properties:

background: var(--header-bg);
display: flex;
justify-content: space-between;
align-items: center;
padding: 0 20px;

4. .sidebar (Navigation Section)
Purpose:
Displays navigation links in a vertical column on the left.

 Properties:
background: var(--sidebar-bg);
padding: 20px;

5. .main (Main Content Area)
Purpose:
Displays central dashboard content like headings, data, or reports.

 Properties:
background: var(--main-bg);
padding: 20px;

6. .footer (Bottom Footer Bar)
Purpose:
Holds simple bottom bar text, matching header colors.

 Properties:

background: var(--footer-bg);
text-align: center;
padding: 10px;

7. CSS VARIABLES: Theme Control
Defined in :root:


--header-bg: greenyellow;
--footer-bg: greenyellow;
--sidebar-bg: #ccc;
--bg-color: white;
--text-color: black;
--border-color: #ccc;
--main-bg: white;
Dark mode overrides via checkbox:


#theme-toggle:checked ~ .dashboard {
  --header-bg: black;
  --footer-bg: black;
  --sidebar-bg: black;
  --bg-color: #222;
  --text-color: white;
  --border-color: #444;
  --main-bg: black;
}


LEARNINGS & OUTCOMES:

Practiced structuring semantic HTML using sections like <header>, <nav>, <footer>, and <main> (or similar).

Understood CSS Grid layout for responsive design with fixed and fluid areas.

Built a full theme toggle system with only HTML and CSS — no JavaScript used.

Used custom properties (--variables) for flexible and manageable theming.

Applied best practices in layout, spacing, and responsiveness for small screens.
